Thank you very much. Mr. Speaker, Mr. Vice President, members of
Congress, the first lady of the United States ...

... and citizens of America, tonight, as we mark the conclusion of our
celebration of Black History Month, we are reminded of our nation's path
toward civil rights and the work that still remains to be done.

Recent threats ...

Recent threats targeting Jewish community centers and vandalism of
Jewish cemeteries, as well as last week's shooting in Kansas City,
remind us that while we may be a nation divided on policies, we are a
country that stands united in condemning hate and evil in all of its
very ugly forms.

Each American generation passes the torch of truth, liberty and justice,
in an unbroken chain all the way down to the present. That torch is now
in our hands. And we will use it to light up the world.

I am here tonight to deliver a message of unity and strength, and it is
a message deeply delivered from my heart. A new chapter ...

... of American greatness is now beginning. A new national pride is
sweeping across our nation. And a new surge of optimism is placing
impossible dreams firmly within our grasp. What we are witnessing today
is the renewal of the American spirit. Our allies will find that America
is once again ready to lead.

All the nations of the world  friend or foe  will find that America is
strong, America is proud, and America is free. In nine years, the United
States will celebrate the 250th anniversary of our founding, 250 years
since the day we declared our independence. It will be one of the great
milestones in the history of the world.

But what will America look like as we reach our 250th year? What kind of
country will we leave for our children? I will not allow the mistakes of
recent decades past to define the course of our future.

For too long, we've watched our middle class shrink as we've exported
our jobs and wealth to foreign countries. We've financed and built one
global project after another, but ignored the fates of our children in
the inner cities of Chicago, Baltimore, Detroit and so many other places
throughout our land.

We've defended the borders of other nations while leaving our own
borders wide open for anyone to cross, and for drugs to pour in at a now
unprecedented rate. And we've spent trillions and trillions of dollars
overseas, while our infrastructure at home has so badly crumbled.

Then, in 2016, the earth shifted beneath our feet. The rebellion started
as a quiet protest, spoken by families of all colors and creeds,
families who just wanted a fair shot for their children, and a fair
hearing for their concerns.

But then the quiet voices became a loud chorus, as thousands of citizens
now spoke out together, from cities small and large, all across our
country.

Finally, the chorus became an earthquake, and the people turned out by
the tens of millions, and they were all united by one very simple, but
crucial demand, that America must put its own citizens first, because
only then can we truly make America great again.

Dying industries will come roaring back to life. Heroic veterans will
get the care they so desperately need. Our military will be given the
resources its brave warriors so richly deserve.

Crumbling infrastructure will be replaced with new roads, bridges,
tunnels, airports and railways, gleaming across our very, very beautiful
land. Our terrible drug epidemic will slow down and ultimately stop. And
our neglected inner cities will see a rebirth of hope, safety and
opportunity.

Above all else, we will keep our promises to the American people.

Thank you. It's been a little over a month since my inauguration, and I
want to take this moment to update the nation on the progress I've made
in keeping those promises. Since my election, Ford, Fiat-Chrysler,
General Motors, Sprint, Softbank, Lockheed, Intel, Walmart and many
others have announced that they will invest billions and billions of
dollars in the United States and will create tens of thousands of new
American jobs.

The stock market has gained almost $3 trillion in value since the
election on Nov. 8, a record. We've saved taxpayers hundreds of millions
of dollars by bringing down the price of fantastic  and it is a
fantastic  new F-35 jet fighter, and we'll be saving billions more on
contracts all across our government.

We have placed a hiring freeze on nonmilitary and nonessential federal
workers.

We have begun to drain the swamp of government corruption by imposing a
five-year ban on lobbying by executive branch officials  and a lifetime
ban ...

Thank you. Thank you. And a lifetime ban on becoming lobbyists for a
foreign government. We have undertaken a historic effort to massively
reduce job-crushing regulations, creating a deregulation task force
inside of every government agency ...

... and we're imposing a new rule which mandates that for every one new
regulation, two old regulations must be eliminated.

We're going to stop the regulations that threaten the future and
livelihood of our great coal miners.

We have cleared the way for the construction of the Keystone and Dakota
Access Pipelines ...

... thereby creating tens of thousands of jobs. And I've issued a new
directive that new American pipelines be made with American steel.

We have withdrawn the United States from the job-killing Trans-Pacific
Partnership.

And with the help of Prime Minister Justin Trudeau, we have formed a
council with our neighbors in Canada to help ensure that women
entrepreneurs have access to the networks, markets and capital they need
to start a business and live out their financial dreams.

To protect our citizens, I have directed the Department of Justice to
form a task force on reducing violent crime. I have further ordered the
Departments of Homeland Security and Justice, along with the Department
of State and the director of national intelligence, to coordinate an
aggressive strategy to dismantle the criminal cartels that have spread
all across our nation.

We will stop the drugs from pouring into our country and poisoning our
youth, and we will expand treatment for those who have become so badly
addicted.

At the same time, my administration has answered the pleas of the
American people for immigration enforcement and border security.

By finally enforcing our immigration laws, we will raise wages, help the
unemployed, save billions and billions of dollars, and make our
communities safer for everyone.

We want all Americans to succeed, but that can't happen in an
environment of lawless chaos.

We must restore integrity and the rule of law at our borders.

For that reason, we will soon begin the construction of a great, great
wall along our southern border.

As we speak tonight, we are removing gang members, drug dealers and
criminals that threaten our communities and prey on our very innocent
citizens. Bad ones are going out as I speak, and as I promised
throughout the campaign. To any in Congress who do not believe we should
enforce our laws, I would ask you this one question: What would you say
to the American family that loses their jobs, their income or their
loved one because America refused to uphold its laws and defend its
borders?

Our obligation is to serve, protect and defend the citizens of the
United States. We are also taking strong measures to protect our nation
from radical Islamic terrorism.

According to data provided by the Department of Justice, the vast
majority of individuals convicted of terrorism and terrorism-related
offenses since 9/11 came here from outside of our country. We have seen
the attacks at home, from Boston to San Bernardino to the Pentagon and,
yes, even the World Trade Center. We have seen the attacks in France, in
Belgium, in Germany and all over the world.

It is not compassionate, but reckless to allow uncontrolled entry from
places where proper vetting cannot occur.

Those given the high honor of admission to the United States should
support this country and love its people and its values. We cannot allow
a beachhead of terrorism to form inside America, and we cannot allow our
nation to become a sanctuary for extremists.

That is why my administration has been working on improved vetting
procedures, and we will shortly take new steps to keep our nation safe,
and to keep those out who will do us harm.

As promised, I directed the Department of Defense to develop a plan to
demolish and destroy ISIS, a network of lawless savages that have
slaughtered Muslims and Christians, and men, women and children of all
faiths and all beliefs. We will work with our allies, including our
friends and allies in the Muslim world, to extinguish this vile enemy
from our planet.

I have also imposed new sanctions on entities and individuals who
support Iran's ballistic missile program, and reaffirmed our unbreakable
alliance with the state of Israel.

Finally, I have kept my promise to appoint a justice to the United
States Supreme Court, from my list of 20 judges, who will defend our
Constitution.

I am greatly honored to have Maureen Scalia with us in the gallery
tonight.

Thank you, Maureen. Her late, great husband, Antonin Scalia, will
forever be a symbol of American justice.

To fill his seat, we have chosen Judge Neil Gorsuch, a man of incredible
skill and deep devotion to the law. He was confirmed unanimously by the
Court of Appeals, and I am asking the Senate to swiftly approve his
nomination.

Tonight, as I outline the next steps we must take as a country, we must
honestly acknowledge the circumstances we inherited. Ninety-four million
Americans are out of the labor force. Over 43 million people are now
living in poverty. And over 43 million Americans are on food stamps.

More than one in five people in their prime working years are not
working. We have the worst financial recovery in 65 years. In the last
eight years, the past administration has put on more new debt than
nearly all of the other presidents combined.

We've lost more than one-fourth of our manufacturing jobs since Nafta
was approved, and we've lost 60,000 factories since China joined the
World Trade Organization in 2001. Our trade deficit in goods with the
world last year was nearly $800 billion. And overseas, we have inherited
a series of tragic foreign policy disasters.

Solving these and so many other pressing problems will require us to
work past the differences of party. It will require us to tap into the
American spirit that has overcome every challenge throughout our long
and storied history. But to accomplish our goals at home and abroad, we
must restart the engine of the American economy, making it easier for
companies to do business in the United States and much, much harder for
companies to leave our country.

Right now, American companies are taxed at one of the highest rates
anywhere in the world. My economic team is developing historic tax
reform that will reduce the tax rate on our companies so they can
compete and thrive anywhere and with anyone.

It will be a big, big cut.

At the same time, we will provide massive tax relief for the middle
class. We must create a level playing field for American companies and
our workers  have to do it.

Currently, when we ship products out of America, many other countries
make us pay very high tariffs and taxes, but when foreign companies ship
their products into America, we charge them nothing or almost nothing.

I just met with officials and workers from a great American company,
Harley-Davidson. In fact, they proudly displayed five of their
magnificent motorcycles, made in the U.S.A., on the front lawn of the
White House.

And they wanted me to ride one, and I said, "No, thank you."

At our meeting, I asked them, "How are you doing? How is business?" They
said that it's good. I asked them further, "How are you doing with other
countries, mainly international sales?"

They told me  without even complaining, because they have been so
mistreated for so long that they've become used to it  that it's very
hard to do business with other countries, because they tax our goods at
such a high rate. They said that in the case of another country, they
taxed their motorcycles at 100 percent.

They weren't even asking for a change. But I am. I believe ...

I believe strongly in free trade, but it also has to be fair trade. It's
been a long time since we had fair trade.

The first Republican president, Abraham Lincoln, warned that "the
abandonment of the protective policy by the American government will
produce want and ruin among our people."

Lincoln was right, and it's time we heeded his advice and his words.

I am not going to let America and its great companies and workers be
taken  advantage of us any longer. They have taken advantage of our
country no longer.

I am going to bring back millions of jobs. Protecting our workers also
means reforming our system of legal immigration.

The current, outdated system depresses wages for our poorest workers and
puts great pressure on taxpayers. Nations around the world, like Canada,
Australia and many others, have a merit-based immigration system.

It's a basic principle that those seeking to enter a country ought to be
able to support themselves financially. Yet in America we do not enforce
this rule, straining the very public resources that our poorest citizens
rely upon.

According to the National Academy of Sciences, our current immigration
system costs American taxpayers many billions of dollars a year.
Switching away from this current system of lower-skilled immigration,
and instead adopting a merit-based system, we will have so many more
benefits. It will save countless dollars, raise workers' wages and help
struggling families, including immigrant families, enter the middle
class. And they will do it quickly, and they will be very, very happy,
indeed.

I believe that real and positive immigration reform is possible, as long
as we focus on the following goals: to improve jobs and wages for
Americans, to strengthen our nation's security and to restore respect
for our laws.

If we are guided by the well-being of American citizens, then I believe
Republicans and Democrats can work together to achieve an outcome that
has eluded our country for decades.

Another Republican president, Dwight D. Eisenhower, initiated the last
truly great national infrastructure program: the building of the
interstate highway system. The time has come for a new program of
national rebuilding.

America has spent approximately $6 trillion in the Middle East, all the
while our infrastructure at home is crumbling.

With the $6 trillion, we could have rebuilt our country twice, and maybe
even three times, if we had people who had the ability to negotiate.

To launch our national rebuilding, I will be asking Congress to approve
legislation that produces a $1 trillion investment in infrastructure of
the United States, financed through both public and private capital,
creating millions of new jobs.

This effort will be guided by two core principles: Buy American and hire
American.

Tonight, I am also calling on this Congress to repeal and replace
Obamacare ...

... with reforms that expand choice, increase access, lower costs and at
the same time provide better health care.

Mandating every American to buy government-approved health insurance was
never the right solution for our country.

The way to make health insurance available to everyone is to lower the
cost of health insurance, and that is what we are going to do.

Obamacare premiums nationwide have increased by double and triple
digits. As an example, Arizona went up 116 percent last year alone. Gov.
Matt Bevin of Kentucky just said Obamacare is failing in his state, the
state of Kentucky, and it's unsustainable and collapsing.

One third of the counties have only one insurer, and they're losing them
fast, they are losing them so fast. They're leaving. And many Americans
have no choice at all. There's no choice left.

Remember when you were told that you could keep your doctor and keep
your plan? We now know that all of those promises have been totally
broken. Obamacare is collapsing, and we must act decisively to protect
all Americans.

Action is not a choice; it is a necessity. So I am calling on all
Democrats and Republicans in Congress to work with us to save Americans
from this imploding Obamacare disaster.

Here are the principles that should guide Congress as we move to create
a better health care system for all Americans.

First, we should ensure that Americans with pre-existing conditions have
access to coverage and that we have a stable transition for Americans
currently enrolled in the health care exchanges.

Secondly, we should help Americans purchase their own coverage, through
the use of tax credits and expanded health savings accounts, but it must
be the plan they want, not the plan forced on them by our government.

Thirdly, we should give our state governors the resources and
flexibility they need with Medicaid to make sure no one is left out.

Fourth, we should implement legal reforms that protect patients and
doctors from unnecessary costs that drive up the price of insurance and
work to bring down the artificially high price of drugs and bring them
down immediately.

And finally, the time has come to give Americans the freedom to purchase
health insurance across state lines ...

... which will create a truly competitive national marketplace that will
bring costs way down and provide far better care. So important.

Everything that is broken in our country can be fixed. Every problem can
be solved. And every hurting family can find healing and hope. Our
citizens deserve this, and so much more, so why not join forces and
finally get the job done and get it done right?

On this and so many other things, Democrats and Republicans should get
together and unite for the good of our country and for the good of the
American people.

My administration wants to work with members of both parties to make
child care accessible and affordable, to help ensure new parents that
they have paid family leave ...

... to invest in women's health, and to promote clean air and clean
water, and to rebuild our military and our infrastructure.

True love for our people requires us to find common ground, to advance
the common good, and to cooperate on behalf of every American child who
deserves a much brighter future.

An incredible young woman is with us this evening who should serve as an
inspiration to us all. Today is Rare Disease Day, and joining us in the
gallery is a rare disease survivor, Megan Crowley. Megan ...

Megan was diagnosed with Pompe disease, a rare and serious illness, when
she was 15 months old. She was not expected to live past 5. On receiving
this news, Megan's dad, John, fought with everything he had to save the
life of his precious child. He founded a company to look for a cure and
helped develop the drug that saved Megan's life. Today she is 20 years
old and a sophomore at Notre Dame.

Megan's story is about the unbounded power of a father's love for a
daughter. But our slow and burdensome approval process at the Food and
Drug Administration keeps too many advances, like the one that saved
Megan's life, from reaching those in need.

If we slash the restraints, not just at the F.D.A. but across our
government, then we will be blessed with far more miracles just like
Megan.

In fact, our children will grow up in a nation of miracles. But to
achieve this future, we must enrich the mind  and the souls  of every
American child. Education is the civil rights issue of our time.

I am calling upon members of both parties to pass an education bill that
funds school choice for disadvantaged youth, including millions of
African-American and Latino children.

These families should be free to choose the public, private, charter,
magnet, religious or home school that is right for them.

Joining us tonight in the gallery is a remarkable woman, Denisha
Merriweather. As a young girl, Denisha struggled in school and failed
third grade twice. But then she was able to enroll in a private center
for learning  great learning center  with the help of a tax credit and a
scholarship program. Today, she is the first in her family to graduate,
not just from high school, but from college. Later this year, she will
get her master's degree in social work. We want all children to be able
to break the cycle of poverty just like Denisha.

But to break the cycle of poverty, we must also break the cycle of
violence. The murder rate in 2015 experienced its largest single-year
increase in nearly half a century. In Chicago, more than 4,000 people
were shot last year alone, and the murder rate so far this year has been
even higher. This is not acceptable in our society.

Every American child should be able to grow up in a safe community, to
attend a great school and to have access to a high-paying job.

But to create this future, we must work with  not against  not against 
the men and women of law enforcement.

We must build bridges of cooperation and trust, not drive the wedge of
disunity and it's  really, it's what it is, division. It's pure,
unadulterated division. We have to unify. Police and sheriffs are
members of our community. They're friends and neighbors, they're mothers
and fathers, sons and daughters, and they leave behind loved ones every
day who worry about whether or not they'll come home safe and sound. We
must support the incredible men and women of law enforcement.

And we must support the victims of crime. I have ordered the Department
of Homeland Security to create an office to serve American victims. The
office is called Voice, Victims of Immigration Crime Engagement.

We are providing a voice to those who have been ignored by our media and
silenced by special interests. Joining us ...

Joining us in the audience tonight are four very brave Americans whose
government failed them. Their names are Jamiel Shaw, Susan Oliver, Jenna
Oliver and Jessica Davis. Jamiel's 17-year-old son was viciously
murdered by an illegal immigrant gang member who had just been released
from prison. Jamiel Shaw Jr. was an incredible young man with unlimited
potential who was getting ready to go to college, where he would have
excelled as a great college quarterback.

But he never got the chance. His father, who is in the audience tonight,
has become a very good friend of mine. Jamiel, thank you. Thank you.

Also with us are Susan Oliver and Jessica Davis. Their husbands  Deputy
Sheriff Danny Oliver and Detective Michael Davis  were slain in the line
of duty in California. They were pillars of their community. These brave
men were viciously gunned down by an illegal immigrant with a criminal
record and two prior deportations. Should have never been in our
country.

Sitting with Susan is her daughter, Jenna. Jenna, I want you to know
that your father was a hero and that tonight you have the love of an
entire country supporting you and praying for you.

To Jamiel, Jenna, Susan and Jessica, I want you to know that we will
never stop fighting for justice. Your loved ones will never, ever be
forgotten. We will always honor their memory.

Finally, to keep America safe, we must provide the men and women of the
United States military with the tools they need to prevent war  if they
must  they have to fight and they only have to win.

I am sending Congress a budget that rebuilds the military, eliminates
the defense sequester...

... and calls for one of the largest increases in national defense
spending in American history.

My budget will also increase funding for our veterans. Our veterans have
delivered for this nation, and now we must deliver for them.

The challenges we face as a nation are great. But our people are even
greater. And none are greater or braver than those who fight for America
in uniform.

We are blessed to be joined tonight by Carryn Owens, the widow of U.S.
Navy special operator, Senior Chief William "Ryan" Owens. Ryan died as
he lived, a warrior and a hero, battling against terrorism and securing
our nation.

I just spoke to our great General [Jim] Mattis just now who reconfirmed
that, and I quote, "Ryan was a part of a highly successful raid that
generated large amounts of vital intelligence that will lead to many
more victories in the future against our enemy."

Ryan's legacy is etched into eternity. Thank you.

And Ryan is looking down right now. You know that. And he's very happy,
because I think he just broke a record.

For as the Bible teaches us, there is no greater act of love than to lay
down one's life for one's friends. Ryan laid down his life for his
friends, for his country and for our freedom. And we will never forget
Ryan.

To those allies who wonder what kind of a friend America will be, look
no further than the heroes who wear our uniform. Our foreign policy
calls for a direct, robust and meaningful engagement with the world. It
is American leadership based on vital security interests that we share
with our allies all across the globe.

We strongly support NATO, an alliance forged through the bonds of two
world wars, that dethroned fascism ...

... and a Cold War and defeated communism.

But our partners must meet their financial obligations. And now, based
on our very strong and frank discussions, they are beginning to do just
that. In fact, I can tell you the money is pouring in. Very nice.

We expect our partners, whether in NATO, in the Middle East or in the
Pacific, to take a direct and meaningful role in both strategic and
military operations, and pay their fair share of the cost  have to do
that.

We will respect historic institutions, but we will respect the foreign
rights of all nations. And they have to respect our rights as a nation,
also.

Free nations are the best vehicle for expressing the will of the people,
and America respects the right of all nations to chart their own path.
My job is not to represent the world. My job is to represent the United
States of America.

But we know that America is better off when there is less conflict, not
more. We must learn from the mistakes of the past. We have seen the war
and the destruction that have ravaged and raged throughout the world.
All across the world.

The only long-term solution for these humanitarian disasters, in many
cases, is to create the conditions where displaced persons can safely
return home and begin the long, long process of rebuilding.

America is willing to find new friends, and to forge new partnerships,
where shared interests align. We want harmony and stability, not war and
conflict. We want peace, wherever peace can be found. America is friends
today with former enemies. Some of our closest allies, decades ago,
fought on the opposite side of these terrible, terrible wars. This
history should give us all faith in the possibilities for a better
world.

Hopefully, the 250th year for America will see a world that is more
peaceful, more just, and more free.

On our 100th anniversary in 1876, citizens from across our nation came
to Philadelphia to celebrate America's centennial. At that celebration,
the country's builders and artists and inventors showed off their
wonderful creations. Alexander Graham Bell displayed his telephone for
the first time. Remington unveiled the first typewriter. An early
attempt was made at electric light. Thomas Edison showed an automatic
telegraph and an electric pen. Imagine the wonders our country could
know in America's 250th year.

Think of the marvels we could achieve if we simply set free the dreams
of our people. Cures to the illnesses that have always plagued us are
not too much to hope. American footprints on distant worlds are not too
big a dream. Millions lifted from welfare to work is not too much to
expect. And streets where mothers are safe from fear  schools where
children learn in peace, and jobs where Americans prosper and grow  are
not too much to ask.

When we have all of this, we will have made America greater than ever
before, for all Americans. This is our vision. This is our mission. But
we can only get there together. We are one people, with one destiny.

We all bleed the same blood. We all salute the same great American flag.
And we are all made by the same God.

When we fulfill this vision, when we celebrate our 250 years of glorious
freedom, we will look back on tonight as when this new chapter of
American greatness began. The time for small thinking is over. The time
for trivial fights is behind us. We just need the courage to share the
dreams that fill our hearts, the bravery to express the hopes that stir
our souls, and the confidence to turn those hopes and those dreams into
action.

From now on, America will be empowered by our aspirations, not burdened
by our fears, inspired by the future, not bound by failures of the past,
and guided by a vision, not blinded by our doubts.

I am asking all citizens to embrace this renewal of the American spirit.
I am asking all members of Congress to join me in dreaming big and bold
and daring things for our country. I am asking everyone watching tonight
to seize this moment. Believe in yourselves. Believe in your future. And
believe, once more, in America.

Thank you, God bless you, and God bless the United States.Mr. Speaker, Mr. Vice President, Members of Congress, the First Lady of
the United States, and my fellow Americans:

Less than 1 year has passed since I first stood at this podium, in this
majestic chamber, to speak on behalf of the American People -- and to
address their concerns, their hopes, and their dreams. That night, our
new Administration had already taken swift action. A new tide of
optimism was already sweeping across our land.

Each day since, we have gone forward with a clear vision and a righteous
mission -- to make America great again for all Americans.

Over the last year, we have made incredible progress and achieved
extraordinary success. We have faced challenges we expected, and others
we could never have imagined. We have shared in the heights of victory
and the pains of hardship. We endured floods and fires and storms. But
through it all, we have seen the beauty of America's soul, and the steel
in America's spine.

Each test has forged new American heroes to remind us who we are, and
show us what we can be.

We saw the volunteers of the "Cajun Navy," racing to the rescue with
their fishing boats to save people in the aftermath of a devastating
hurricane.

We saw strangers shielding strangers from a hail of gunfire on the Las
Vegas strip.

We heard tales of Americans like Coast Guard Petty Officer Ashlee
Leppert, who is here tonight in the gallery with Melania. Ashlee was
aboard one of the first helicopters on the scene in Houston during
Hurricane Harvey. Through 18 hours of wind and rain, Ashlee braved live
power lines and deep water, to help save more than 40 lives. Thank you,
Ashlee.

We heard about Americans like firefighter David Dahlberg. He is here
with us too. David faced down walls of flame to rescue almost 60
children trapped at a California summer camp threatened by wildfires.

To everyone still recovering in Texas, Florida, Louisiana, Puerto Rico,
the Virgin Islands, California, and everywhere else -- we are with you,
we love you, and we will pull through together.

Some trials over the past year touched this chamber very personally.
With us tonight is one of the toughest people ever to serve in this
House -- a guy who took a bullet, almost died, and was back to work
three and a half months later: the legend from Louisiana, Congressman
Steve Scalise.

We are incredibly grateful for the heroic efforts of the Capitol Police
Officers, the Alexandria Police, and the doctors, nurses, and paramedics
who saved his life, and the lives of many others in this room.

In the aftermath of that terrible shooting, we came together, not as
Republicans or Democrats, but as representatives of the people. But it
is not enough to come together only in times of tragedy. Tonight, I call
upon all of us to set aside our differences, to seek out common ground,
and to summon the unity we need to deliver for the people we were
elected to serve.

Over the last year, the world has seen what we always knew: that no
people on Earth are so fearless, or daring, or determined as Americans.
If there is a mountain, we climb it. If there is a frontier, we cross
it. If there is a challenge, we tame it. If there is an opportunity, we
seize it.

So let us begin tonight by recognizing that the state of our Union is
strong because our people are strong.

And together, we are building a safe, strong, and proud America.

Since the election, we have created 2.4 million new jobs, including
200,000 new jobs in manufacturing alone. After years of wage stagnation,
we are finally seeing rising wages.

Unemployment claims have hit a 45-year low. African-American
unemployment stands at the lowest rate ever recorded, and Hispanic
American unemployment has also reached the lowest levels in history.

Small business confidence is at an all-time high. The stock market has
smashed one record after another, gaining $8 trillion in value. That is
great news for Americans' 401k, retirement, pension, and college savings
accounts.

And just as I promised the American people from this podium 11 months
ago, we enacted the biggest tax cuts and reforms in American history.

Our massive tax cuts provide tremendous relief for the middle class and
small businesses.

To lower tax rates for hardworking Americans, we nearly doubled the
standard deduction for everyone. Now, the first $24,000 earned by a
married couple is completely tax-free. We also doubled the child tax
credit.

A typical family of four making $75,000 will see their tax bill reduced
by $2,000 -- slashing their tax bill in half.

This April will be the last time you ever file under the old broken
system -- and millions of Americans will have more take-home pay
starting next month.

We eliminated an especially cruel tax that fell mostly on Americans
making less than $50,000 a year -- forcing them to pay tremendous
penalties simply because they could not afford government-ordered health
plans. We repealed the core of disastrous Obamacare -- the individual
mandate is now gone.

We slashed the business tax rate from 35 percent all the way down to 21
percent, so American companies can compete and win against anyone in the
world. These changes alone are estimated to increase average family
income by more than $4,000.

Small businesses have also received a massive tax cut, and can now
deduct 20 percent of their business income.

Here tonight are Steve Staub and Sandy Keplinger of Staub Manufacturing
-- a small business in Ohio. They have just finished the best year in
their 20-year history. Because of tax reform, they are handing out
raises, hiring an additional 14 people, and expanding into the building
next door.

One of Staub's employees, Corey Adams, is also with us tonight. Corey is
an all-American worker. He supported himself through high school, lost
his job during the 2008 recession, and was later hired by Staub, where
he trained to become a welder. Like many hardworking Americans, Corey
plans to invest his taxcut raise into his new home and his two
daughters' education. Please join me in congratulating Corey.

Since we passed tax cuts, roughly 3 million workers have already gotten
tax cut bonuses -- many of them thousands of dollars per worker. Apple
has just announced it plans to invest a total of $350 billion in
America, and hire another 20,000 workers.

This is our new American moment. There has never been a better time to
start living the American Dream.

So to every citizen watching at home tonight -- no matter where you have
been, or where you come from, this is your time. If you work hard, if
you believe in yourself, if you believe in America, then you can dream
anything, you can be anything, and together, we can achieve anything.

Tonight, I want to talk about what kind of future we are going to have,
and what kind of Nation we are going to be. All of us, together, as one
team, one people, and one American family.

We all share the same home, the same heart, the same destiny, and the
same great American flag.

Together, we are rediscovering the American way.

In America, we know that faith and family, not government and
bureaucracy, are the center of the American life. Our motto is "in God
we trust."

And we celebrate our police, our military, and our amazing veterans as
heroes who deserve our total and unwavering support.

Here tonight is Preston Sharp, a 12-year-old boy from Redding,
California, who noticed that veterans' graves were not marked with flags
on Veterans Day. He decided to change that, and started a movement that
has now placed 40,000 flags at the graves of our great heroes. Preston:
a job well done.

Young patriots like Preston teach all of us about our civic duty as
Americans. Preston's reverence for those who have served our Nation
reminds us why we salute our flag, why we put our hands on our hearts
for the pledge of allegiance, and why we proudly stand for the national
anthem.

Americans love their country. And they deserve a Government that shows
them the same love and loyalty in return.

For the last year we have sought to restore the bonds of trust between
our citizens and their Government.

Working with the Senate, we are appointing judges who will interpret the
Constitution as written, including a great new Supreme Court Justice,
and more circuit court judges than any new administration in the history
of our country.

We are defending our Second Amendment, and have taken historic actions
to protect religious liberty.

And we are serving our brave veterans, including giving our veterans
choice in their healthcare decisions. Last year, the Congress passed,
and I signed, the landmark VA Accountability Act. Since its passage, my
Administration has already removed more than 1,500 VA employees who
failed to give our veterans the care they deserve -- and we are hiring
talented people who love our vets as much as we do.

I will not stop until our veterans are properly taken care of, which has
been my promise to them from the very beginning of this great journey.

All Americans deserve accountability and respect -- and that is what we
are giving them. So tonight, I call on the Congress to empower every
Cabinet Secretary with the authority to reward good workers -- and to
remove Federal employees who undermine the public trust or fail the
American people.

In our drive to make Washington accountable, we have eliminated more
regulations in our first year than any administration in history.

We have ended the war on American Energy -- and we have ended the war on
clean coal. We are now an exporter of energy to the world.

In Detroit, I halted Government mandates that crippled America's
autoworkers -- so we can get the Motor City revving its engines once
again.

Many car companies are now building and expanding plants in the United
States -- something we have not seen for decades. Chrysler is moving a
major plant from Mexico to Michigan; Toyota and Mazda are opening up a
plant in Alabama. Soon, plants will be opening up all over the country.
This is all news Americans are unaccustomed to hearing -- for many
years, companies and jobs were only leaving us. But now they are coming
back.

Exciting progress is happening every day.

To speed access to breakthrough cures and affordable generic drugs, last
year the FDA approved more new and generic drugs and medical devices
than ever before in our history.

We also believe that patients with terminal conditions should have
access to experimental treatments that could potentially save their
lives.

People who are terminally ill should not have to go from country to
country to seek a cure -- I want to give them a chance right here at
home. It is time for the Congress to give these wonderful Americans the
"right to try."

One of my greatest priorities is to reduce the price of prescription
drugs. In many other countries, these drugs cost far less than what we
pay in the United States. That is why I have directed my Administration
to make fixing the injustice of high drug prices one of our top
priorities. Prices will come down.

America has also finally turned the page on decades of unfair trade
deals that sacrificed our prosperity and shipped away our companies, our
jobs, and our Nation's wealth.

The era of economic surrender is over.

From now on, we expect trading relationships to be fair and to be
reciprocal.

We will work to fix bad trade deals and negotiate new ones.

And we will protect American workers and American intellectual property,
through strong enforcement of our trade rules.

As we rebuild our industries, it is also time to rebuild our crumbling
infrastructure.

America is a nation of builders. We built the Empire State Building in
just 1 year -- is it not a disgrace that it can now take 10 years just
to get a permit approved for a simple road?

I am asking both parties to come together to give us the safe, fast,
reliable, and modern infrastructure our economy needs and our people
deserve.

Tonight, I am calling on the Congress to produce a bill that generates
at least $1.5 trillion for the new infrastructure investment we need.

Every Federal dollar should be leveraged by partnering with State and
local governments and, where appropriate, tapping into private sector
investment -- to permanently fix the infrastructure deficit.

Any bill must also streamline the permitting and approval process --
getting it down to no more than two years, and perhaps even one.

Together, we can reclaim our building heritage. We will build gleaming
new roads, bridges, highways, railways, and waterways across our land.
And we will do it with American heart, American hands, and American
grit.

We want every American to know the dignity of a hard day's work. We want
every child to be safe in their home at night. And we want every citizen
to be proud of this land that we love.

We can lift our citizens from welfare to work, from dependence to
independence, and from poverty to prosperity.

As tax cuts create new jobs, let us invest in workforce development and
job training. Let us open great vocational schools so our future workers
can learn a craft and realize their full potential. And let us support
working families by supporting paid family leave.

As America regains its strength, this opportunity must be extended to
all citizens. That is why this year we will embark on reforming our
prisons to help former inmates who have served their time get a second
chance.

Struggling communities, especially immigrant communities, will also be
helped by immigration policies that focus on the best interests of
American workers and American families.

For decades, open borders have allowed drugs and gangs to pour into our
most vulnerable communities. They have allowed millions of low-wage
workers to compete for jobs and wages against the poorest Americans.
Most tragically, they have caused the loss of many innocent lives.

Here tonight are two fathers and two mothers: Evelyn Rodriguez, Freddy
Cuevas, Elizabeth Alvarado, and Robert Mickens. Their two teenage
daughters -- Kayla Cuevas and Nisa Mickens -- were close friends on Long
Island. But in September 2016, on the eve of Nisa's 16th Birthday,
neither of them came home. These two precious girls were brutally
murdered while walking together in their hometown. Six members of the
savage gang MS13 have been charged with Kayla and Nisa's murders. Many
of these gang members took advantage of glaring loopholes in our laws to
enter the country as unaccompanied alien minors - and wound up in Kayla
and Nisa's high school.

Evelyn, Elizabeth, Freddy, and Robert: Tonight, everyone in this chamber
is praying for you. Everyone in America is grieving for you. And 320
million hearts are breaking for you. We cannot imagine the depth of your
sorrow, but we can make sure that other families never have to endure
this pain.

Tonight, I am calling on the Congress to finally close the deadly
loopholes that have allowed MS13, and other criminals, to break into
our country. We have proposed new legislation that will fix our
immigration laws, and support our ICE and Border Patrol Agents, so that
this cannot ever happen again.

The United States is a compassionate nation. We are proud that we do
more than any other country to help the needy, the struggling, and the
underprivileged all over the world. But as President of the United
States, my highest loyalty, my greatest compassion, and my constant
concern is for America's children, America's struggling workers, and
America's forgotten communities. I want our youth to grow up to achieve
great things. I want our poor to have their chance to rise.

So tonight, I am extending an open hand to work with members of both
parties -- Democrats and Republicans -- to protect our citizens of every
background, color, religion, and creed. My duty, and the sacred duty of
every elected official in this chamber, is to defend Americans -- to
protect their safety, their families, their communities, and their right
to the American Dream. Because Americans are dreamers too.

Here tonight is one leader in the effort to defend our country: Homeland
Security Investigations Special Agent Celestino Martinez -- he goes by
CJ. CJ served 15 years in the Air Force before becoming an ICE agent and
spending the last 15 years fighting gang violence and getting dangerous
criminals off our streets. At one point, MS13 leaders ordered CJ's
murder. But he did not cave to threats or fear. Last May, he commanded
an operation to track down gang members on Long Island. His team has
arrested nearly 400, including more than 220 from MS13.

CJ: Great work. Now let us get the Congress to send you some
reinforcements.

Over the next few weeks, the House and Senate will be voting on an
immigration reform package.

In recent months, my Administration has met extensively with both
Democrats and Republicans to craft a bipartisan approach to immigration
reform. Based on these discussions, we presented the Congress with a
detailed proposal that should be supported by both parties as a fair
compromise -- one where nobody gets everything they want, but where our
country gets the critical reforms it needs.

Here are the four pillars of our plan:

The first pillar of our framework generously offers a path to
citizenship for 1.8 million illegal immigrants who were brought here by
their parents at a young age -- that covers almost three times more
people than the previous administration. Under our plan, those who meet
education and work requirements, and show good moral character, will be
able to become full citizens of the United States.

The second pillar fully secures the border. That means building a wall
on the Southern border, and it means hiring more heroes like CJ to keep
our communities safe. Crucially, our plan closes the terrible loopholes
exploited by criminals and terrorists to enter our country -- and it
finally ends the dangerous practice of "catch and release."

The third pillar ends the visa lottery -- a program that randomly hands
out green cards without any regard for skill, merit, or the safety of
our people. It is time to begin moving towards a merit-based immigration
system -- one that admits people who are skilled, who want to work, who
will contribute to our society, and who will love and respect our
country.

The fourth and final pillar protects the nuclear family by ending chain
migration. Under the current broken system, a single immigrant can bring
in virtually unlimited numbers of distant relatives. Under our plan, we
focus on the immediate family by limiting sponsorships to spouses and
minor children. This vital reform is necessary, not just for our
economy, but for our security, and our future.

In recent weeks, two terrorist attacks in New York were made possible by
the visa lottery and chain migration. In the age of terrorism, these
programs present risks we can no longer afford.

It is time to reform these outdated immigration rules, and finally bring
our immigration system into the 21st century.

These four pillars represent a down-the-middle compromise, and one that
will create a safe, modern, and lawful immigration system.

For over 30 years, Washington has tried and failed to solve this
problem. This Congress can be the one that finally makes it happen.

Most importantly, these four pillars will produce legislation that
fulfills my ironclad pledge to only sign a bill that puts America first.
So let us come together, set politics aside, and finally get the job
done.

These reforms will also support our response to the terrible crisis of
opioid and drug addiction.

In 2016, we lost 64,000 Americans to drug overdoses: 174 deaths per day.
Seven per hour. We must get much tougher on drug dealers and pushers if
we are going to succeed in stopping this scourge.

My Administration is committed to fighting the drug epidemic and helping
get treatment for those in need. The struggle will be long and difficult
-- but, as Americans always do, we will prevail.

As we have seen tonight, the most difficult challenges bring out the
best in America.

We see a vivid expression of this truth in the story of the Holets
family of New Mexico. Ryan Holets is 27 years old, and an officer with
the Albuquerque Police Department. He is here tonight with his wife
Rebecca. Last year, Ryan was on duty when he saw a pregnant, homeless
woman preparing to inject heroin. When Ryan told her she was going to
harm her unborn child, she began to weep. She told him she did not know
where to turn, but badly wanted a safe home for her baby.

In that moment, Ryan said he felt God speak to him: "You will do it --
because you can." He took out a picture of his wife and their four kids.
Then, he went home to tell his wife Rebecca. In an instant, she agreed
to adopt. The Holets named their new daughter Hope.

Ryan and Rebecca: You embody the goodness of our Nation. Thank you, and
congratulations.

As we rebuild America's strength and confidence at home, we are also
restoring our strength and standing abroad.

Around the world, we face rogue regimes, terrorist groups, and rivals
like China and Russia that challenge our interests, our economy, and our
values. In confronting these dangers, we know that weakness is the
surest path to conflict, and unmatched power is the surest means of our
defense.

For this reason, I am asking the Congress to end the dangerous defense
sequester and fully fund our great military.

As part of our defense, we must modernize and rebuild our nuclear
arsenal, hopefully never having to use it, but making it so strong and
powerful that it will deter any acts of aggression. Perhaps someday in
the future there will be a magical moment when the countries of the
world will get together to eliminate their nuclear weapons.
Unfortunately, we are not there yet.

Last year, I also pledged that we would work with our allies to
extinguish ISIS from the face of the Earth. One year later, I am proud
to report that the coalition to defeat ISIS has liberated almost 100
percent of the territory once held by these killers in Iraq and Syria.
But there is much more work to be done. We will continue our fight until
ISIS is defeated.

Army Staff Sergeant Justin Peck is here tonight. Near Raqqa last
November, Justin and his comrade, Chief Petty Officer Kenton Stacy, were
on a mission to clear buildings that ISIS had rigged with explosives so
that civilians could return to the city.

Clearing the second floor of a vital hospital, Kenton Stacy was severely
wounded by an explosion. Immediately, Justin bounded into the
booby-trapped building and found Kenton in bad shape. He applied
pressure to the wound and inserted a tube to reopen an airway. He then
performed CPR for 20 straight minutes during the ground transport and
maintained artificial respiration through 2 hours of emergency surgery.

Kenton Stacy would have died if not for Justin's selfless love for a
fellow warrior. Tonight, Kenton is recovering in Texas. Raqqa is
liberated. And Justin is wearing his new Bronze Star, with a "V" for
"Valor." Staff Sergeant Peck: All of America salutes you.

Terrorists who do things like place bombs in civilian hospitals are
evil. When possible, we annihilate them. When necessary, we must be able
to detain and question them. But we must be clear: Terrorists are not
merely criminals. They are unlawful enemy combatants. And when captured
overseas, they should be treated like the terrorists they are.

In the past, we have foolishly released hundreds of dangerous
terrorists, only to meet them again on the battlefield -- including the
ISIS leader, al-Baghdadi.

So today, I am keeping another promise. I just signed an order directing
Secretary Mattis to reexamine our military detention policy and to keep
open the detention facilities at Guantnamo Bay.

I am also asking the Congress to ensure that, in the fight against ISIS
and al-Qa'ida, we continue to have all necessary power to detain
terrorists -- wherever we chase them down.

Our warriors in Afghanistan also have new rules of engagement. Along
with their heroic Afghan partners, our military is no longer undermined
by artificial timelines, and we no longer tell our enemies our plans.

Last month, I also took an action endorsed unanimously by the Senate
just months before: I recognized Jerusalem as the capital of Israel.

Shortly afterwards, dozens of countries voted in the United Nations
General Assembly against America's sovereign right to make this
recognition. American taxpayers generously send those same countries
billions of dollars in aid every year.

That is why, tonight, I am asking the Congress to pass legislation to
help ensure American foreign-assistance dollars always serve American
interests, and only go to America's friends.

As we strengthen friendships around the world, we are also restoring
clarity about our adversaries.

When the people of Iran rose up against the crimes of their corrupt
dictatorship, I did not stay silent. America stands with the people of
Iran in their courageous struggle for freedom.

I am asking the Congress to address the fundamental flaws in the
terrible Iran nuclear deal.

My Administration has also imposed tough sanctions on the communist and
socialist dictatorships in Cuba and Venezuela.

But no regime has oppressed its own citizens more totally or brutally
than the cruel dictatorship in North Korea.

North Korea's reckless pursuit of nuclear missiles could very soon
threaten our homeland.

We are waging a campaign of maximum pressure to prevent that from
happening.

Past experience has taught us that complacency and concessions only
invite aggression and provocation. I will not repeat the mistakes of
past administrations that got us into this dangerous position.

We need only look at the depraved character of the North Korean regime
to understand the nature of the nuclear threat it could pose to America
and our allies.

Otto Warmbier was a hardworking student at the University of Virginia.
On his way to study abroad in Asia, Otto joined a tour to North Korea.
At its conclusion, this wonderful young man was arrested and charged
with crimes against the state. After a shameful trial, the dictatorship
sentenced Otto to 15 years of hard labor, before returning him to
America last June -- horribly injured and on the verge of death. He
passed away just days after his return.

Otto's Parents, Fred and Cindy Warmbier, are with us tonight -- along
with Otto's brother and sister, Austin and Greta. You are powerful
witnesses to a menace that threatens our world, and your strength
inspires us all. Tonight, we pledge to honor Otto's memory with American
resolve.

Finally, we are joined by one more witness to the ominous nature of this
regime. His name is Mr. Ji Seong-ho.

In 1996, Seong-ho was a starving boy in North Korea. One day, he tried
to steal coal from a railroad car to barter for a few scraps of food. In
the process, he passed out on the train tracks, exhausted from hunger.
He woke up as a train ran over his limbs. He then endured multiple
amputations without anything to dull the pain. His brother and sister
gave what little food they had to help him recover and ate dirt
themselves -- permanently stunting their own growth. Later, he was
tortured by North Korean authorities after returning from a brief visit
to China. His tormentors wanted to know if he had met any Christians. He
had -- and he resolved to be free.

Seong-ho traveled thousands of miles on crutches across China and
Southeast Asia to freedom. Most of his family followed. His father was
caught trying to escape, and was tortured to death.

Today he lives in Seoul, where he rescues other defectors, and
broadcasts into North Korea what the regime fears the most - the truth.

Today he has a new leg, but Seong-ho, I understand you still keep those
crutches as a reminder of how far you have come. Your great sacrifice is
an inspiration to us all.

Seong-ho's story is a testament to the yearning of every human soul to
live in freedom.

It was that same yearning for freedom that nearly 250 years ago gave
birth to a special place called America. It was a small cluster of
colonies caught between a great ocean and a vast wilderness. But it was
home to an incredible people with a revolutionary idea: that they could
rule themselves. That they could chart their own destiny. And that,
together, they could light up the world.

That is what our country has always been about. That is what Americans
have always stood for, always strived for, and always done.

Atop the dome of this Capitol stands the Statue of Freedom. She stands
tall and dignified among the monuments to our ancestors who fought and
lived and died to protect her.

Monuments to Washington and Jefferson -- to Lincoln and King.

Memorials to the heroes of Yorktown and Saratoga -- to young Americans
who shed their blood on the shores of Normandy, and the fields beyond.
And others, who went down in the waters of the Pacific and the skies
over Asia.

And freedom stands tall over one more monument: this one. This Capitol.
This living monument to the American people.

A people whose heroes live not only in the past, but all around us --
defending hope, pride, and the American way.

They work in every trade. They sacrifice to raise a family. They care
for our children at home. They defend our flag abroad. They are strong
moms and brave kids. They are firefighters, police officers, border
agents, medics, and Marines.

But above all else, they are Americans. And this Capitol, this city, and
this Nation, belong to them.

Our task is to respect them, to listen to them, to serve them, to
protect them, and to always be worthy of them.

Americans fill the world with art and music. They push the bounds of
science and discovery. And they forever remind us of what we should
never forget: The people dreamed this country. The people built this
country. And it is the people who are making America great again.

As long as we are proud of who we are, and what we are fighting for,
there is nothing we cannot achieve.

As long as we have confidence in our values, faith in our citizens, and
trust in our God, we will not fail.

Our families will thrive.

Our people will prosper.

And our Nation will forever be safe and strong and proud and mighty and
free.

Thank you, and God bless America.